Cracking competitive exams like JEE, NEET and UPSC Civil Services require much more than just studying. Let’s find out what does it take to crack competitive exams in India.


1. Start as early as you can
The biggest factor that makes a difference to your entire journey of preparation, is how early you start. This will decide how much time you have for learning new concepts and practicing complex questions. Experts at Toppr suggest starting during or after grade 10 are optimal for an undergraduate course. You will have a fair understanding of basic concepts with enough time to learn the advanced ones. Starting 2-3 years before your final exam provides you enough preparation time..

However, don’t be disheartened if you have missed the grade 10 bus. There are many engineers, working in Toppr itself, who had started preparing much later, but still made it into the IITs. If you have started after all your friends, you may need to simply put in more intensive and longer study hours to make up for lost time.

2. Planning and strategizing is essential

Before you start preparing for any competitive exam, you must design a plan and strategy that suits your needs. The first step is to get yourself completely familiar with difficulty level of the tests that you are targeting. Evaluate where you are and what should be your approach to acquire the required skills. Number of hours you should spend for self study and practice. Ensure your plan is not aggressive that you feel overburdened and are not able to keep up, and not so relaxed that you end up with a lot of free time.

Ensure that you have also considered subjects that you find difficultand allot more time to these. If necessary, develop a high level plan and a low level plan which is a break up of the high level plan. Your high level plan is an overall plan which divides the entire syllabus into 3 phases - learning, practicing, and revising. Your low level plan considers individual subjects, modules, and chapters, and allots time to each of them.  You can start with a month long low level plan and then create one every month, ensuring that it is in line with the high level plan.
4. Practice is the key

Now that you have understood your concepts and remember them, you must start practicing. Start by explaining these concepts to your friends and peers. This will help you create a stronger foundation.

The next step is to take subject or topic wise practice tests. Focus on using your understanding to solve an array of questions based on those concepts. As you start attempting these questions, you will get better at solving them. The amount of time you will spend per question will reduce.

Once you have completed the syllabus, start solving as many mock tests and previous year question papers as you can. These will give you a real feel of the exam and you will be able to plan an overall exam strategy. The more mock tests you solve, the more acclimatised your body gets to focusing for long hours and dealing with pressure situations.